Yes. Welcome Paul.
Oh, hey Paul. Now just Paul.
And for the sake of those in the room,
we'll just introduce ourselves.
Um, Connor, I'm the chair of the committee.
Greg Fleming from Good mp.
Got Benjamin Ho. I live in Hamilton. Right.
Okay, Paul. So you can take your petition as read.
We've got you for 10 minutes.
Um, but be good to leave some time
for questions at the end. Yeah,
Totally.
Uh, well thanks for allowing the opportunity to
present this oral submission on behalf of Car Jam.
Um, rather than, I think as you, as you wish,
rather than wading through the detail
of the existing submission, uh, what I'd like
to do is focus on addressing some
of the points in the N zts submission sort of bit
by bit, if that's okay.
So, um, I dunno if you have the nzt a submission in front
of you, but I'll read out the bits
that I wanna discuss anyway.
Um, so the first part that I'd like to talk about is, uh,
a sentence in it that says, um,
this was the first comprehensive review of fees
and charges that N ZT a had undertaken
since the agency was established in 2008,
that this is not quite correct.
Uh, in 2011, uh, the existing data service at
that time was subject to review.
Uh, at that point, the NZTO was 6 million in profit, uh,
in this area of their business,
and they wanted to rejig things in line with legislation
where they were only allowed to do cost recovery.
So yeah, in 2011, there was a review
and they removed a lot of the more extensive data
that was available to us,
and that we were simply turning over to public
for free at that time.
Uh, there is another reason I'll mention this 2011 review,
uh, that I'll come back to later
and I wanna make sure that's understood
that there's been multiple reviews.
Um, so the second point I'd like to address is the statement
that Car Jam is of the view
that the public cannot rely on the police data from the
police website as it is not updated in real time,
like the MVR, the Motor Vehicle Register.
So that's the NZTA agreeing with the primary thrust of our
argument that the police data is not as accurate
or as timely as the NZTA.
And, uh, I don't know if you've really looked in,
in absolute detail at this,
but it's kind of non-intuitive
that the NZTA data is more accurate than the police
data that's published.
So that's really a core part of our submission.
It's a very important part that the NZTA data
that they are now charging for
is actually more accurate than the police data
that they're suggesting that we use.
So it's very important to, to understand
that it is not real time the police data, uh,
and more importantly, the police list is incomplete.
We provided the NZPA with a list of plates
that we've discovered by manual searching
that are in the NZTA Motor Vehicle register
and are not listed as stolen in the police data.
Uh, there are many, many more of these kind of plates
in the NZPA data that we have not had.
Uh, we, we've not invested the significant cost to go
through vast numbers of plates
to find the absolute percentage,
but there are many, just on a manual examination, I was able
to provide the NZA with about 20 plates
that are not in the police website data
and are in the NZTA data.
This is, again, I'll repeat it.
This is a core issue for Car Jam in wanting to make this,
uh, reverse of the change that happened.
The police data is not as accurate as the NZDA data.
Uh, and as I say, it's quite non-intuitive
and the differences between the,
the two data sets we have never been able
to fully determine.
We've had many, many conversations with the NZTA
and with the police trying to determine how this happens,
that the NZTA data appears to be more extensive
and more real time than the police data,
but never received any kind
of answer explanation from anyone involved in this.
So the third point I'd like to cover, uh,
is the NZC a's statement about the costs
that it's approximately 11 million per annum.
Uh, and the point of their changes were
to introduce a per request charge, which they believe, uh,
was a simple and fair way
of making sure costs are recovered from the right parties.
Um, the main point here
to understand is this was not balanced against the risk, uh,
the, the safety and the cost to the public and the police,
and to some extent to industry, uh, in the fact
that the NZTA data is better than the police data,
and we can no longer provide that more accurate data
to the public for free.
Um, and there is no other source of this free NZTA date,
NZTA themselves do not published this freely
to, uh, the public.
So CAR Jam is viewed as the main source
of vehicle information in New Zealand.
It's not me bragging, this is just a general impression
of people in New Zealand that CAR Jam is some kind
of combination of the government, the police, and the NZTA.
They, we have many, many emails asking us about things
saying why we don't change things.
And it's, it's because we are not the government,
we're not the police, we're not the NZTA,
but we are viewed as a primary source of data
and we can no longer give out
that data about the stolen face of the car for free.
Um, which is why we want this decision reversed.
Um, if the police website was real time
and included all the vehicles
that are in the NZTA motor vehicle register list is stolen.
Uh, we wouldn't be here today.
We, we wouldn't have an argument against these changes.
Uh, but it is not, that's why we've spent many months
and now comes this hearing, um, to try
and get this decision reversed so we can provide
the free data regarding the stolen status to the public, uh,
to improve the security and reduce crime
and all the other issues that I,
I outlined in the original written submission.
Um, so the fourth point I wanted to talk about is
that, uh, in the NZT a's written submission,
they sides a general concern, uh,
amongst people consulted in the, uh, consultation period
about the additional costs that would have on businesses.
Kajam have never commented on this, both the change in 2011
that I mentioned before,
and the change in 2023, uh,
do not impact car jam's fundamental bottom line, uh,
in any negative way.
All it does is force us back an old school model
of buying and selling data.
The negative effect is
that we can't give the free safety stolen
information to the public.
That's the biggest negative effect out of,
it's not any impact on car Jam's revenue or profit.
Um, so we did not complain about the effect on our business.
We were only complaining about the effect on
the safety of the public.
Um, so, uh, yeah, I think
that's, uh, probably everything I wanted to say.
Uh, you guys have any questions or?
I have not made anything clear.
Yeah, can I just clarify,
how do you get your revenue from what you do?
The sale of reports, including things like money owing,
Sorry, the, The sale of reports,
including other data like money owing
and information that we always had to pay the NZTA
for things like the vehicle history,
the odometer history and things like that.
The stolen status is just something we give out
to the public for free all the time.
And we do hundreds of thousands, actually, millions
of queries per month.
I'd say we are, again, I'm not bragging, we're kind
of a household name, but if you wanna know about the status
of the car, you go to Car Jam, you don't go
to the police website, you don't go to the NZTA.
That's just how things are.
So we are perceived as the primary source of information,
uh, in New Zealand for vehicle data.
And that's what's been taken away.
The ability to deliver the most secure, the safest,
the most accurate information about the stolen safe
of a car for free to the public.
That's what we want reversed.
So, yeah. Question.
Sorry, Mr. Chair. Um, you, thank you Paul for, for that.
Uh, so just borrowing, you mentioned
before you said that, uh, that this change hasn't had any
negative impact on your business model.
That's right. Yes. So the, the only reason
that you're asking for this is to
maintain public access to the best data. That's
Correct, yes. Okay.
The accurate data, we don't wanna tell people
here is an accurate status of the stolen status
of your car if we don't actually know it.
And today we don't actually know it
because of the differences
between the NZ TA's motor vehicle register,
which is more accurate than the police free data.
Okay. Website data. Yes.
So if NZ Sorry, Taj, just to be clear, kaja kind
of branding is built on public trust,
and that's why we want to provide the most trust
to the public about the stolen states.
If you go to kaja right now, you know,
we're not hiding this issue
on the free reports that KAJA provides.
We explain and say, please be aware,
this is not necessarily absolutely accurate status of,
of your car's stolen status.
So it's all, for us, it's all about public trust.
Okay. So if NZTA were to provide a service
that, um, that you, you can no longer provide,
that would be just as good an outcome
If people went to the NZTA. Yes.
Right. Okay. But they don't, they come
to Car Jam right now.
Obviously businesses change.
We might be, we might descend at some point,
but right now everybody thinks Car Jam is the main source
of data about cars in New Zealand.
And again, I really wanna emphasize, I'm not bragging,
that is just how it is.
We didn't expect either to become a household name 15
years ago when we started.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Alright, any other questions, members? No, thank you Chip.
Alright. No, very good.
Um, that's, uh, that's how we, I wish, um, all our, um,
our submissions were succinct and, uh, and clear.
So thanks very much, uh, appreciate that. Yeah.
Um, you're welcome to stay online.
We, um, now hearing from, um, Waka. Kohi.
Okay. Thank You. And, uh, Mr. Rodley and Usher Bush.
Asha. Asha.
Right. Thank you very much. Now you've got, uh,
we've got 10 minutes, so looking forward
to hearing from you, hopefully some
time for questions at the end.
So, yeah. Fantastic. Welcome.
Yep. Uh, Kyoto, my name's Chris Rodley.
Uh, I'm the, uh, national Manager
of Regulatory System Design, uh, at N-Z-T-A-I
Kda. I'm Meredith Asher.
I'm group General C
Look, capital Risk and Legal.
Alright, thank you.
Thank you for, uh, for having us here today.
So I, I don't have too much more to add, uh, than, than
what Paul covered actually.
And what's in the submission.
Um, just to reiterate, of course, that the fees,
when we say a significant fee review hadn't occurred, uh,
since, since NZ TA's inception, we're talking about, uh,
2023, we covered over 200, uh, fees
and charges in that, um, in that review.
So not, not simply just the, uh, data charges, um, the,
the data charges cover the cost
of supplying the data out to users.
Um, and, uh, that fee setting went through, you know,
public consultation.
A lot of policy work went into it, cabinet made decisions.
And as part of that policy work, we did talk about, um, uh,
providing data, um, as like a public good.
And ultimately cabinet decided, um, that it, that it needed
to be, uh, user pays, um,
because the money has to come from somewhere.
Um, and treasury auditor general guidance tell us
that we can't cross subsidize from other areas
of the system, uh, the land transport system.
Um, and ultimately cabinet wasn't at that time willing
to sort of fund that.
Uh, the alternative does exist, um, for free on the,
on the police website.
It was previously updated three times, um, per day.
It's now updated hourly with police. I I hand on heart.
Don't know how NZTA data is more accurate than police
because our data comes from police.
Mm. People don't report stolen vehicles to NZTA.
They report stolen vehicles to police
that goes into their database.
And there's an automatic portal, which just puts a,
what we call a flag,
a tick against the vehicle in the motor vehicle register.
In fact, our, our data
with the Motor Vehicle Register doesn't even capture
what date or time it was stolen, when the tick went away.
Anything like that, literally just a tick.
So hand on heart, don't know
how our data can be more accurate when we
are not the source of data.
Um, yeah, that's about all I wanted to cover.
Yeah. How does the tick,
when, how is that removed?
A automatically through police
When they presumably when they the,
the, the, the vehicle is found
Or when the vehicle is found or, yeah, insurance updates.
Um, Mr. Bates,
Thanks, thanks very much
for the presentation and submission.
Just recovery.
How do you determine what it costs
to provide this information, for example, to CAR J?
Yeah, so this one was a relatively basic calculation
around how much does it cost NZTA each year to
have the registers.
Uh, and then how many transactions are run over them through
that, um, online portal called MO Check.
Um, so usually our commercial users, uh,
and then it's a simple division, so there's about 70,
70 million transactions over that.
Um, so 11 million divided by 70, uh, 70 million, uh, equals
what our per data requests
Charge and andary.
Are you able to share
what revenue you've got from this specific
stolen vehicle report
From accessing, from accessing stolen vehicles?
Yeah. Well, it becomes no surprise
that CAR James volumes have gone lay down on stolen
vehicle, uh, thing.
So, uh, the number
of transactions over motor check has significantly dropped.
So while we were, had hoped
or expected to get the 11 million, we,
we are not getting delivered.
Right. Um,
and if the data
is simply a replication of the New Zealand police data,
why does NZTA maintain a register
of stolen vehicles In duplicate?
In duplicate? Yeah, it, it's, um,
it can help NZTA on, on a good a couple of things.
So registering a vehicle, uh, so when you may go into AA
or VTNZ or, um, some other agent
or online to, to register your vehicle,
if it's got a stolen flag against it, it will, um, sort
of throw an error and it won't let you do that.
Um, and also, uh, we've recently taken over, um, uh,
safety cameras from police.
And so, uh, if we're going to be sending infringements out,
uh, and there's a flag for stolen, um,
it's perhaps not the registered owner that's, uh,
responsible for that, uh, safety camera infringement
Supplementary.
So what is the internal charge
or the charge to the customer when police use it
for an in infringement notice?
Yeah. And when you physically find out it's
stolen standing at the aa,
There's, uh, there's no charge.
It's only commercial users.
So if there's a commercial benefit, um, for users, uh, a,
a commercial benefit for those
who are going to use the data.
Okay. So, so I fully understand you take the
full cost Yeah.
Of the registrar, of, of the registry.
You divide it by the commercial users,
which have gone significantly down since setting that price,
yet the core business reason for having the register
is not related to the on sale of those reports.
No. And, and it's, um,
certainly not solely on stolen vehicle, uh, status.
So those are just a couple of, you know, dozens of, dozens
of uses for, uh, motor vehicle registered data.
So, so probably, uh,
Sorry, if I'm, if I'm not getting this quite right,
can I just have a go at trying to, what, what we've,
in the last, for 15, you've got a,
uh, a commercial enterprise
that was accessing government data for free Mm-Hmm.
And I'm guessing an N NZ TA's perception, notwithstanding
what Paul's comment was that they were extracting, um,
some commercial benefit from it, given
that was the justification, wanting introduce a charge.
Mm-Hmm, that's correct. So far, yes.
So the cost of providing that service was then divided
by the number of accesses.
With your understanding that significant number, roughly
how many outta the 70 million do,
do you think were coming from Car Jam?
Oh, it's a significant number.
Proportion, yeah. Yeah. Significant
Proportion. 20 million, 50 million
Between 20 and 50, yeah, between
2050. So the majority
of it, so essentially this was NZTA looking
to, um, charge the primary user of
that data for the data
because NZTA saw the commercial benefit,
and you, you've got the, that card jam saying no,
the risk, no commercial benefit.
And that appears to be proven by the fact
that since the charge came in, they've largely, well,
they haven't stopped using it,
but it's gone down significantly.
So, I mean, there's a mismatch here of
how the setup, the system was set up,
Possibly, uh, other than to just reiterate that it's the,
the ultimate source is police.
So, um, uh, those are the guys that,
that have the data, collect the data,
provide the data for free.
So I guess, um, regardless of what data point it is or,
or set of data that costs MZTA
and ultimately New Zealanders to, uh, for us to collect,
store, maintain,
and then also provide that data out to users.
So, yep. Mr.
Sorry, supplementary chair.
But if you take that argument a step further, then you,
the argument would be you've got two government agencies,
one provides this particular set of data for free,
the other charges for it, your argument saying,
well then just go and use the free data.
Fine. But then why would NZTA continue to have that data?
And if I understood your answer to the earlier question,
it's because you have other business purposes for needing
to provide that data.
So it, it feels like the answer to one question is X,
but then the answer to the other question is y Right?
Depending on the perspective. And it, yes.
And we're not gonna solve it in the hearing, Mr.
Chair, but I think there's some questions there that
from a business model perspective, need to be dug in.
You, you've, you've hit the jackpot,
you've got the two government chartered accountants,
or two of the six chartered accountants in the house, all
of which sit on the national benches are sitting
in front of you this afternoon,
Ironically, ironically,
arguing against user pays, but that's all right.
No, no, not arguing against user pays.
To be clear, the record, Mr.
Chair, making sure we understand the business model.
I would, uh, before,
Yes, I would need to go away
and do some further digging as to whether the, um,
11 million covers everything.
And so is this 11 million just
for Moto Check commercial users
and the kind of costs associated with that as opposed to
internal usage, which will come from
ultimately user pays as well.
Right? So, um, thinking like vehicle registration, we need
to change something either automatically
or manual, manually into the register as part
of the registration costs.
There's likely a charge built into there for that,
but I would, I would need to dig deeper.
We'd be happy to receive those
as supplementary answers. Yeah.
Mm. And just, just on the point of the business model, um,
you know, our business model, you know, has changed
and with the fees and funding review,
but similarly, the Car Jams model could also change if they
chose to, to, you know, they do charge for as, um,
as Paul said, they do charge for their other services.
So to continue to maintain this as a free service, they,
they could alter their charges for their other service.
It's a bit of a loss. Leave for the
Questions. Yeah.
To boil.
Thank you for your answers. And likewise, Meredith.
Um, I may need some guidance from the chair
because I've never sat in this committee before.
If this question isn't within the scope of
what I can ask you, but, um, Paul mentioned his concerns
around public safety as a primary reason for the petition.
And I want to understand if you also feel there is a
risk to public safety?
I, uh, no,
because the data is available to New Zealanders
through the police website.
Yeah, okay.
Um, yeah, no, that, um,
and certainly the, you, you need it for,
since you are now sending out the tickets, um,
for the speed cameras, it's that, uh, that, that would,
you don't still call 'em speed cameras. Safety
Cameras. Safety cameras, yeah.
Safety
Cameras. I thought, I
thought I picked a change in terminology.
Alright. Okay gentlemen, good questions,
good discussion. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Cheers. Thank you. Thank you guys.
Alright, uh, going to the next item.
Um, item five, petition
of Angela Clifford was now Angela.
We're hearing her in person an is,
Sorry.
And you're from, you from MPI. Ministry.
Ministry. Oh, H,
Sorry.
Oh right, sorry. I just, I've got a
Welcome Angela.
Welcome.
Oh, welcome. Just introduce yourself Connor.
I'm the chair of the committee. Greg Fleming, MP for
MP for Nui Kilda Corp.
Benjamin Aho, I live in and I'm from the Green Party.
Kda. Thank You. Alright. No, thank you.
Uh, thank for your patience.
Um, now we have you for 10 minutes,
so you can take your submissions as read,
although obviously you'll wanna speak to them
and it'd be good if you could leave some time
for questions at the end.
Absolutely. Um, I'm Angela Clifford.
I lead eat New Zealand Alter's not-for-profit Food Movement.
Um, and I presented this petition in collaboration
with Freedom Farms and awa.
Um, and this is my colleague Helen Beatty,
and this is why she's sitting next to me for support today.
Um, we presented a petition calling
for a national food strategy for Al Tierra.
Um, we, uh, obviously presented that strategy, uh, uh,
presented the petition a while ago.
It was well supported by over 60 different industry bodies
and, um, food organizations and businesses.
Um, and we have had the opportunity to review
where we currently sit, um,
and we would like to ask
for a first step towards a national food strategy,
which would be the establishment
of a food security council for New Zealand.
We think this could be advantageous
because it's not a big overwhelming,
strategically complicated step.
Um, a food security council for New Zealand could coordinate
and integrate government
and civil society response to food systems,
shocks and tensions.
It could establish, um, emergency frameworks
and build resilience.
Um, it can f facilitate knowledge sharing
and enable a community voice and advocate
and implement long-term food security policies.
Uh, there are other places around the world
that have food security councils, including Brazil,
Toronto, and Canada.
And interestingly,
Australia is currently considering a national
food security strategy.
Um, and we know that there is a, uh,
cross agency working party within the government currently
that's looking at a food strategy.
So this wouldn't be reinventing the wheel.
Um, and we think there's a huge opportunity to, uh,
continue their work, but also to encourage both civil
society and industry to be part of
that. That's it.
Alright. Thank you. Um, questions.
Um, yeah, I, so thank you very much for, um,
your submission and, um, I'm, what I, this,
this question is, is holding in all of the submissions
that I read, including from the ministry of, um, ministry
of Health in particular with, um, uh,
quite a detailed document that they sent through
that done last year, I'm still struggling to get my head
around exactly what a strategy would be.
Are you able to talk me through that,
Um, Executive summary form
And, and also just extending
and how it might change what we're doing now?
Yeah. An obvious
Change it might take place just to save my
Question. Um, so
globally, uh,
what we can see is a step into a food systems reaction
to food system problems and tensions.
And when New Zealand is at,
at the moment is we have a quite a siloed reaction depending
on whose jurisdiction it is,
whether it's MPI or MOH.
And so there's no real cross agency
or cross um, systems place to imagine
what we want for a food system for New Zealanders.
So strategy is a word that you can easily get, um,
caught up on, but it's basically a vision or a plan.
It's, it's where we want to go to being a food nation.
It's what we want as, uh,
new Zealanders from our food system.
Um, and that could be, it's not for me to say what
that should be and what should be in it,
but all I'm asking for is for the process to begin.
And I feel that the establishment
of a food security council, given the time that we are in,
could be a really simple first step towards that.
So I guess if I could just add to that. Yeah.
Um, you know, we've got the supermarket commissioner
and the focused on one area,
but that's actually only one part of a much,
much broader food system.
You can see the front of that very nice orange document
that I can see tucked under, uh, Carl's papers.
There. There's a lot of pieces in the food system
that the supermarket commissioner can't address.
It's, it's outside that mandate.
So this is about bringing all of those conversations
to the table and additionally,
making sure we're not doing things in silos
because we regulate things and we do things.
And my own personal bandwagon,
we forget about the animals in that system.
For example, I'm
Feeding people, we figure, sorry, the animals, sorry,
sorry, I, sorry, I missed the word.
We're forgetting. We forget about the animals. Yeah.
Just as an example. But you know, if we, if Ministry
of Health does it, then they focus on one part of it.
If MPI does it, they do another bit.
Um, uh, um, MSD want lots
of cheap food to go out to people, whatever.
Yeah. We actually need all of those people
to be at the table so that we have a, a systems approach to
what is a wicked problem to, for our people of New Zealand
to be able to have affordable, nutritious kai,
which is the backstory
to our export market right at the moment.
We've got hungry people in New Zealand
and an export strategy that's focused on sending snuff
to other people while our own people don't have access to
that good food, it's not a good story.
So this would be a step in the right direction
to trying to Right.
Pull together a systems thinking approach
to feeding our people as well
as supporting our export strategy.
Okay. And also, um,
designing resilient emergency frameworks for any, um,
system shocks that might come at us from global geopolitical
or trade interruption or any of those things.
It's basically a plan.
And I don't think any business in the world has ever thought
that a plan was a bad idea.
Can I just ask something that, just
that last one's interesting.
Any business, so inherent in your idea is that the food
delivery production or both the food production
and food delivery services of New Zealand, uh,
would work best if coordinated from Wellington?
Uh, no, I don't, I think it is a, um, co-design process
that includes government, community,
and industry, right.
And in fact, um, food security councils around the world use
that model of the three different aspects of our food system
and bring everybody around the same table.
Our words were very carefully chosen,
which is government facilitated, community led.
Yes. But the government facilitated in line
with you your comment that no business, you know,
wouldn't want a strategy suggest to me that that
that that fundamental to the, to what you're asking
for is a view that, that things are ultimately best designed
and lead from within Wellington,
from within central government. Is that correct?
I think that it would be ridiculous to consider
that there would either be a food security council
as a first step or a national food strategy without
government involvement.
Yeah. I don't think it would ever fly.
Um, but I do think that it's the, it's the, it's the
co-design with industry at the table
and community at the table that would see an investment.
So it wouldn't just be a strategy
that sat on a folder on a shelf.
Yeah. It would be an investment by all
of the stakeholders within the food system
to design a food system that works for all of us.
And can we get pushed back? Quite sorry,
get pushed back quite a lot by people saying it's all
happening at community level and that's true.
There's great stuff happening. Yeah.
But that's been going on for a lot of years now
and we still haven't solved the
overarching problem. So we have to,
And the overarching problem is
Food insecurity in this country with a whole bunch
of people who can't afford nutritious kai while we export
stuff and make money.
Thank you. Yeah. Thank you.
We want you involved because we
think Wellington brings some value.
Yeah. Mr. Bates,
Thanks Chair.
Um, two questions,
but I'll, I'll start with my, the original one first.
So in terms of the idea
of having government involved in the council, um, is that
because you need the government in order
to start the process?
So the purpose of the petition, uh, and,
and I would suggest that there are a number of industries
where they've created the council,
which is then brought the government to the table, you know,
as opposed to waiting the government to do it.
Uh, or is the four point of the petition
that you need government to say,
we are gonna create the council,
or the government's gonna create the council so
that there's funding attached to that to make it happen?
Yeah, I So essentially You're asking for money?
Uh, yes. Okay.
But not a huge amount.
And, um, and it is already part
of your program anyway in terms
of your cross party working group.
So all we are asking for is an extension
that would include the ability for community
and industry to be involved.
And I don't know if this is a question
or more just a statement on the point made about, um,
food security and export.
I know in, in Nui we've got a food security group
that's come together based on voluntary organizations
and they're starting to leave the process,
but I think even they acknowledge
that if we weren't exporting food,
we wouldn't be earning the tax to pay
for all the stuff that is
Being provided.
Absolutely. Absolutely.
We can't have one without the price.
It's not an neither or it's an and
and we absolutely need our export industry to earn money
for our country to create GDP in order for us to be able
to eat a hundred percent.
But at the same time, we also have the opportunity
to focus on how we feed ourselves.
And I don't think that just detracts from our export, um,
thing and the same.
So, uh, in North Canterbury we recently bought together our
largest supermarkets, federated farmers, civil defense,
both our councils, public health representatives,
food rescue organizations
and other community groups to imagine
and map food security for our region.
Mm-hmm. Was incredibly successful.
And, uh, people who sit around a table
who may not naturally find themselves sitting
around the same table, but when they've all had the common
goal of creating a food secure local community,
then everybody was able to work together.
So I guess what I'm asking is for that
to happen at a national level. Alright,
So this is, this doesn't involve the quality of the food,
it's about distribution of food.
Ah, that be fair? Yes.
I think, um, super important
that we feed our people nutritious food.
I think it's important that we have access to that food.
I think it's important. Um, but it's
Not, I'm just saying it's not the type of food,
it's the availability of the food.
It's both would be fair. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. Um, Dole,
Um, I understand that one of the key contexts for, um,
food insecurity is obviously climate change
and the risks that are involved with that.
And it's a systems issue requiring a
systems change approach.
I'm interested to know where in the system, um, iwi and Hapu
and marai are involved in this plan that you have.
Yeah. I know you've got community as one aspect.
Is that the space you envisage it?
Yes, I think so.
And, um, understanding the importance of Kai, um, uh,
from a al Maori perspective a little bit, I think
that's incredibly important that that's represented. Have
You, have you worked alongside Iwi Maori
in this, this program? This plan?
Yes. We have. Um, worked, uh, so I was part
of a leadership group considering a national food strategy
through Manai, um, which was an initiative that of the old
circle, and that was a partnership, uh,
leadership partnership, um, between Iwi
and, uh, KPMGs, uh, ran ma.
Um, and we have worked variously, um, with Maori,
um, on the idea of a national food strategy
through different working streams.
Yes. Yep.
Thank you. Alright. Look, thank you very much.
It's been, uh, no since,
Oh, we just wanted to ask what what, um,
what can we ask from the petitions committee
and what happens from this point?
Alright, well, we'll we'll be hearing from the ministry,
um, and then we essentially gather up the,
there's an information gathering exercise from the committee
and we will then report back to Parliament on
essentially your, your petition, um, and the response
and with a, often with a recommendation.
And so would I have the opportunity to, um,
send you this information about the possibility
of a food security council?
Yeah, sure. Okay. To add
To that question, we, we can include that.
So we, we we're, we're a committee here that, uh, you know,
you've petitioned us, so we want
to report back on your petition with the best quality
and all the information available.
Awesome. Um,
and using our accounting skills,
our detective skills and whatever skills, whatever
Skills I had Skills, whatever skills we bring here, um,
in, in endeavor to, and report
back to the house
essentially. Absolutely. We're the conduit for that.
Awesome. Thank you so much. I appreciate your time.
Thank you.
Um, ministry of Health
and we've got problem, we've got MPI
as well up together Yes.
Here, but I would, wouldn't make sense.
And we'll just hear from,
well I've got NPI first on my list,
so we'll perhaps hear from you, speak to your submission
and uh, we can question you both together.
So. Alright. So, um, I you,
You're a ua
So I'm Sarah Re I'm from the Ministry of Primary Industries.
My role is as a manager of food policy
and you've seen as submission, um,
the New Zealand food System is complex and it is unique.
The reason it's unique is
because it's a food system that has to do a lot
of different things, has to obviously produce enough food
for New Zealand citizens,
but it's what, how we export, it's
what our prosperity is based on.
So our food system also has
to support the global food market
Mind. Just speaking, there's a little
more into
the microphone there Chap.
Can you hear the back? Thanks.
Thanks very much. Yeah, sorry.
So, um, it, not only do do we have
to feed our own citizens, it produces enough food
for exports to support the global food system
and it's what underpins our prosperity.
But one in five New Zealanders have an income
because they work in the New Zealand food system.
So it, it's large, it's complex.
Um, it has, it's, has issues.
It's not immune from the global shocks that we've seen
to our food system
because we import about 20% of the food
that we consume comes from imports as well
as some critical imports.
Like we import all of our sugar, a lot of our wheat, um,
a lot of averageable oils.
So we are not, um, isolated from a global food system.
And so we experience the shocks when the global
system has shocks as well.
Um, MPI is involved in the regulation
of the food system we regulate to ensure that food is safe
and suitable no matter who eats it.
We're also responsible
for supporting trade and market access,
Sir. Well, okay. Well perhaps
we're here from the Ministry
of Health and then we can, um, mix and match our question.
I work for the Ministry
of Health in the MA public Health Unit.
I'm the director there and I, um,
I also have the responsibility for looking
after the nutrition and food systems work for
The Ministry of Health And the public health agency.
So, um, as Sarah's um, mentioned, you know, we do have a,
a really, uh, complicated food system.
It sits across a number of government departments.
Sarah and I meet, I know, um, regularly, monthly probably
to talk about the intersecting areas
where our work comes together, how the work that we do in,
um, the ministry intersects with the work that NPI does.
So we are already quite connected.
Um, we have a particular focus on the health impacts
of our nutritious diet.
So we are looking at, um, it's been identified as a,
as a significant priority in the GPS, um, for the minister
and it's something we've been working directly
with Minister ti on In terms of the areas
of focus and nutrition.
Um, we are obviously really interested in food security
and in particular making sure that our populations
that experience food insecurity are able
to access healthy Kai.
Uh, and as I say, we have a number of agencies that we work
with, including the Ministry of Primary Industries, ministry
of Social Development and other agencies to look at
how we work collegially
and collaboratively to improve the food system
and to deliver the best outcomes
for the New Zealand population.
Alright. So basically, um,
yours is the nut nutri say Nutrition,
Nutrition, nutrition, nutrition and
Versus the Safety and security. Yeah.
Is that pretty much summed up? Yeah. Okay.
So a strategy bearing in mind,
you've seen the petition here we're speaking to, so
have, do we have a strategy?
Is there a would, would, I mean, obviously you, both
of you in your departments sit within bigger strategic goals
of your departments, but is there anything resembling a
food strategy in New Zealand?
Not at the current time. Uh,
so there was a public health advisory committee recommended
to the Minister of Health that there'd be a food strategy.
Um, the minister hasn't, hasn't made a decision that
that's what he wants to progress.
Um, there are a number of areas we are working on
where there is connections,
but we don't have a single overarching document
that drives that.
We do that through our collaborative work
Programing. Do you think
we need a strategy?
It depends what, what a strategy is aiming to do. Mm.
And part of, part of the complexity
and why there hasn't been a food strategy is
because our, again, our system is complex.
It, it's kind of like, what is it we're trying to do?
I mean, we've got a food safety strategy,
we've got a trade strategy,
we've got a public health strategy.
Um, it's kind of
because there isn't a single agency responsible for food,
there's not a single food strategy overseas.
When people have attempted to develop a food strategy,
it can be very complex and very difficult and very lengthy
because of the all the interconnections.
And it can be very easy when you push on one part
of the food system, you have consequences elsewhere.
Mm-Hmm. And you have to be very aware
of unintended consequences of changes
that you're trying to progress. Mm-Hmm.
Through your chair, have there been any measurable
benefits from the documentation of food strategy in any
of those other countries that you're aware of?
I don't have any. I'm unaware of that.
Um, sorry, go, go ahead. Um, yeah.
Um, Michelle, the, um, on the, the, the Ministry
of Health submission, there was a a
who already helped the document,
it was a 1 24 page document I didn't realize
previously existed under the, um, it come
through from the previous government, um, at the direction
The Public health Advisory committee. That's
Right, yes. Yeah, yeah.
Um, were you involved with that at all?
So the Public Health Advisory Committee is an independent
committee that reports directly to the minister.
Yeah. So they are, we provide secretariat support to them,
but they, because of their independent nature, we don't,
we don't adjudicate on what they write, what they determine
that that's their independent voice.
Right. The, the Public Health Advisory Committee did, um,
they were commissioned under the previous government
and they submitted the report to the Minister of Health.
At this stage we have had no feedback from the Minister
of Health about Yeah.
What aspects, if any, he would like
to address in that report. Mm-Hmm.
Um, sorry, I just, I was just looking for, we,
we are seeing, considering another report today on, um,
Chlor clo.
It's a, it's a, someone's petition, was it off pieces? Yeah.
Pour off. Yeah. So something like that.
That is now we, there's obviously some work going on about,
with the suitability of that being in our food chain.
Um, is that something
that you would see fitting into a strategy, a food strategy
That would fit into a food safety
strategy, safety strategy?
So that's about the quality safety of our Kai,
which is different than a food system, which is the,
all the mechanisms that produce. But
Presumably in a strategy
that would all come under that, wouldn't it? I mean,
Um, quite possibly.
Um, but at the moment, new Zealand's food regulatory system,
which would consider this is joint with Australia.
So we've got a joint food standard system
and they have the, they're, they've got their own strategy
that, and there's a work program in there which looks at
these emerging, these emerging chemicals
and toxins and Right.
And responds to those as they arise.
So, but that would probably have to stay, exist outside
of strategy, a food strategy, wouldn't they?
'cause there's so many that's a, that's another moving part.
That's, it's another moving part.
Alright. Alright.
Well look, um, members, any further questions?
Well thank you very much. Thank you much.
It's a great committee for learning a lot about a
lot, a little about a lot.
Yeah. Little about a little about a lot.
Alright. Thank you very much. Thank you. Um, alright.
And thank you for all submitters today. Much appreciated.
I think you've heard we, we'll be reporting back on, uh,
as from your, your very good question,
reporting back on our findings
and, um, back to the house. Thank you.
Thank you very much.